---
slug: 'components'
date: '2020-11-23'
title: 'Components'
---

Synthesizers generate sound through various analogue and digital techniques.
Early synthesizers were analog hardware based but many modern synthesizers use a
combination of DSP software and hardware or else are purely software-based (see
softsynth). Digital synthesizers often emulate classic analog designs. Sound is
controllable by the operator by means of circuits or virtual stages that may
include:

- Oscillators typically produce waveforms (such as sawtooth, sine, or pulse
  waves) with different timbres.
- Low-frequency oscillators (LFOs) produce waveforms used to modulate
  parameters, such as the pitch of oscillators (producing vibrato).
- Voltage-controlled filter (VCFs) – "shape" the sound generated by the
  oscillators in the frequency domain, often under the control of an envelope or
  LFO. These are essential to subtractive synthesis.
- Envelope generators – provide envelope modulation to "shape" the volume or
  harmonic content of the produced note in the time domain with the principal
  parameters being attack, decay, sustain and release. These are used in most
  forms of synthesis. ADSR control is provided by envelope generators.
- Voltage-controlled amplifiers (VCAs) control the volume or gain of the audio
  signal. VCAs can be modulated by other components, such as LFOs and envelopes.
- After the signal generated by one (or a mix of more) VCOs has been modified by
  filters and LFOs, and its waveform has been shaped (contoured) by an ADSR
  envelope generator, it then passes on to one or more voltage-controlled
  amplifiers (VCAs). A VCA is a preamp that boosts (amplifies) the electronic
  signal before passing it on to an external or built-in power amplifier, as
  well as a means to control its amplitude (volume) using an attenuator. The
  gain of the VCA is affected by a control voltage (CV), coming from an envelope
  generator, an LFO, the keyboard or some other source.

## Filter

Filters are particularly important in subtractive synthesis, being designed to
pass some frequency regions (or "bands") through unattenuated while
significantly attenuating ("subtracting") others. The low-pass filter is most
frequently used, but band-pass filters, band-reject filters and high-pass
filters are also sometimes available.

The filter may be controlled with a second ADSR envelope. An "envelope
modulation" ("env mod") parameter on many synthesizers with filter envelopes
determines how much the envelope affects the filter. If turned all the way down,
the filter produces a flat sound with no envelope. When turned up the envelope
becomes more noticeable, expanding the minimum and maximum range of the filter.
The envelope applied on the filter helps the sound designer generating long
notes or short notes by moving the parameters up and down such as decay, sustain
and finally release. For instance by using a short decay with no sustain, the
sound generated is commonly known as a stab. Sound designers may prefer shaping
the sound with filter instead of volume.

## Envelope

Envelopes control how sounds change over time. They may control parameters such
as amplitude (volume), filters (frequencies), or pitch. The most common envelope
is the ADSR (attack, decay, sustain, release) envelope:

- Attack time is the time taken for initial run-up of level from nil to peak,
  beginning when the note is triggered.
- Decay time is the time taken for the subsequent run down from the attack level
  to the designated sustain level.
- Sustain level is the level during the main sequence of the sound's duration,
  until the key is released.
- Release time is the time taken for the level to decay from the sustain level
  to zero after the key is released.

## LFO

A low-frequency oscillator (LFO) generates an electronic signal, usually below
20 Hz. LFO signals create a periodic control signal or sweep, often used in
vibrato, tremolo and other effects. In certain genres of electronic music, the
LFO signal can control the cutoff frequency of a VCF to make a rhythmic wah-wah
sound, or the signature dubstep wobble bass.

## Arpeggiator

An arpeggiator (arp) is a feature available on several synthesizers that
automatically steps through a sequence of notes based on an input chord, thus
creating an arpeggio. The notes can often be transmitted to a MIDI sequencer for
recording and further editing. An arpeggiator may have controls for speed,
range, and order in which the notes play; upwards, downwards, or in a random
order. More advanced arpeggiators allow the user to step through a
pre-programmed complex sequence of notes, or play several arpeggios at once.
Some allow a pattern sustained after releasing keys: in this way, a sequence of
arpeggio patterns may be built up over time by pressing several keys one after
the other. Arpeggiators are also commonly found in software sequencers. Some
arpeggiators/sequencers expand features into a full phrase sequencer, which
allows the user to trigger complex, multi-track blocks of sequenced data from a
keyboard or input device, typically synchronized with the tempo of the master
clock. Arpeggiators seem to have grown from the accompaniment system used in
electronic organs in the mid-1960s to the mid-1970s.

## Controllers

Synthesizers are often controlled with electronic or digital keyboards or MIDI
controller keyboards, which may be built into the synthesizer unit or attached
via connections such as CV/gate, USB, or MIDI. Keyboards may offer expression
such as velocity sensitivity and aftertouch, allowing for more control over the
sound. Other controllers include Ribbon controllers, which track the movement of
the finger across a touch-sensitive surface; wind controllers, played similarly
to woodwind instruments; motion-sensitive controllers similar to video game
motion controllers; electronic drum pads, played similarly to the heads of a
drum kit; touchplates, which send signals depending on finger position and
force; controllers designed for microtonal tunings; touchscreen devices such as
tablets and smartphones; and fingerpads.
