---
slug: 'history-of-synthesizers'
date: '2020-11-20'
title: 'History of Synthesizers'
---

## Precursors

As electricity became more widely available, the early 20th century saw the
invention of electronic musical instruments including the Telharmonium,
Trautonium, Ondes Martenot, and theremin. The Hammond organ, introduced in 1935,
was the first electronic instrument to enjoy wide success. In 1948, the Canadian
engineer Hugh Le Caine completed the electronic sackbut, a precursor to
voltage-controlled synthesizers, with keyboard sensitivity allowing for vibrato,
glissando, and attack control.

In 1957, Harry Olson and Herbert Belar completed the RCA Mark II Sound
Synthesizer at the RCA laboratories in Princeton, New Jersey. The instrument
read punched paper tape that controlled an analog synthesizer containing 750
vacuum tubes. It was acquired by the Columbia-Princeton Electronic Music Center
and used almost exclusively by Milton Babbitt, a composer at Princeton
University.

## 1960s – 1970s: Early years

The authors of Analog Days define "the early years of the synthesizer" as
between 1964 and the mid-1970s, beginning with the debut of the Moog
synthesizer. Designed by American engineer Robert Moog, the synthesizer was
composed of separate modules which created and shaped sounds, connected by patch
cords. Moog developed a means of controlling pitch through voltage, the
voltage-controlled oscillator. This, along with Moog components such as
envelopes, noise generators, filters, and sequencers, became standards in the
synthesizer market.

Around the same period, American engineer Don Buchla created the Buchla Modular
Electronic Music System. Instead of a conventional keyboard, Buchla's system
used touchplates which transmitted control voltages depending on finger position
and force. However, the Moog's keyboard made it more accessible and marketable
to musicians, and keyboards became the standard means of controlling
synthesizers. Moog and Buchla initially avoided the word synthesizer for their
instruments, as it was associated with the RCA synthesizer; however, by the
1970s, "synthesizer" had become the standard term. In 1970, Moog launched a
cheaper, smaller synthesizer, the Minimoog. The Minimoog was the first
synthesizer sold in music stores, and was more practical for live performance;
it standardized the concept of synthesizers as self-contained instruments with
built-in keyboards.

After retail stores started selling synthesizers in 1971, other synthesizer
companies were established, including ARP in the US and EMS in the UK. ARP's
products included the ARP 2600, which folded into a carrying case and had
built-in speakers, and the Odyssey, a rival to the Minimoog. The less expensive
EMS synthesizers were used by European art rock and progressive rock acts
including Brian Eno and Pink Floyd. Designs for synthesizers appeared in the
amateur electronics market, such as the "Practical Electronics Sound
Synthesiser", published in Practical Electronics in 1973. By the mid-1970s, ARP
was the world's largest synthesizer manufacturer, though it closed in 1981.

Early synthesizers were monophonic, meaning they could only play one note at a
time. Some of the earliest commercial polyphonic synthesizers were created by
American engineer Tom Oberheim, such as the OB-X (1979). In 1978, the American
company Sequential Circuits released the Prophet-5, first fully programmable
polyphonic synthesizer. The Prophet-5 used microprocessors for patch memory,
allowing users to store sounds. This overcame a major difficulty in previous
synthesizers, which required users to adjust cables and knobs to change sounds,
with no guarantee of exactly recreating a sound. This facilitated a move from
synthesizers creating unpredictable sounds to producing "a standard package of
familiar sounds". 1980s: Market growth and digital technology

## 1980s: Market growth and digital technology

The synthesizer market grew dramatically in the 1980s. 1982 saw the introduction
of MIDI, a standardized means of synchronizing electronic instruments; it
remains an industry standard. An influential sampling synthesizer, the Fairlight
CMI, was released in 1979, with the ability to record and play back samples at
different pitches. Though its high price made it inaccessible to amateurs, it
was adopted by high-profile pop musicians including Kate Bush and Peter Gabriel.
The success of the Fairlight drove competition, improving sampling technology
and lowering prices; early competing samplers included the E-mu Emulator in 1981
and the Akai S-series in 1985.

In 1983, Yamaha released the first commercially successful digital synthesizer,
the Yamaha DX7. Based on frequency modulation (FM) synthesis developed by
Stanford University engineer John Chowning, the DX7 remains one of the
bestselling synthesizers in history and was the first synthesizer to sell over
100,000 units. It was widely used in 1980s pop music. Compared to the "warm" and
"fuzzy" sounds of analog synthesis, the DX7 was characterized by its "harsh",
"glassy" and "chilly" sounds. Digital synthesizers typically contained preset
sounds emulating acoustic instruments, with algorithms controlled with menus and
buttons. The Synclavier, a digital synthesizer made with FM technology licensed
from Yamaha, offered features such as 16-bit sampling and built-in digital
recording. With a starting price of \$13,000, its use was limited to
universities, studios and wealthy artists.

The success of the DX7 led to competing digital synthesizers. The Roland D-50
(1987) blended Roland's linear arithmetic algorithm with samples, and was the
first mass-produced synthesizer with built-in effects such as delay, reverb and
chorus. In 1988, the Japanese manufacturer Korg released the M1, a digital
synthesizer workstation featuring sampled transients and loops; with over
250,000 units sold, it remains the bestselling synthesizer in history. The
advent of digital synthesizers led to a downturn in interest in analog
synthesizers.

## 1990s – present: Software synthesizers and analog revival

1997 saw the release of ReBirth by Propellerhead Software and Reality by Seer
Systems, the first software synthesizers that could be played in real time via
MIDI. In 1999, an update to the music software Cubase allowed users to run
software instruments (including synthesizers) as plug-ins, triggering a
"torrent" of new software instruments. Propellerhead's Reason, released in 2000,
offered users a virtual "rack" of recognisable studio equipment. Whereas once
they had filled rooms, synthesizers now can be embedded on single microchips in
any electronic device and accurately emulated by software.

The market for patchable and modular synthesizers rebounded in the late 1990s.
In the 2000s, older analog synthesizers regained popularity, sometimes selling
for much more than their original prices. In the 2010s, new, affordable analog
synthesizers were introduced by companies including Moog, Korg, Arturia, and
Dave Smith Instruments. The renewed interest is credited to the appeal of
imperfect "organic" sounds and simpler interfaces, and to modern surface-mount
technology making analog synthesizers cheaper and faster to manufacture.
