---
slug: 'impact-of-synthesizers'
date: '2020-11-21'
title: 'Impact of Synthesizers'
---

Early synthesizers were viewed as avant-garde, valued by the 1960s psychedelic
and counter-cultural scenes for their ability to make new sounds, but with
little perceived commercial potential. Switched-On Bach (1968), a bestselling
album of Bach compositions arranged for Moog synthesizer by Wendy Carlos,
demonstrated that synthesizers could be more than "random noise machines",
taking them to the mainstream. However, debates were held about the
appropriateness of synthesizers in baroque music, and according to the Guardian
they were quickly abandoned in "serious classical circles".[

The Moog was adopted by acts including the Doors, the Grateful Dead, the Rolling
Stones, the Beatles, and Keith Emerson. Emerson was the first major rock
musician to perform with the Moog and it became a trademark of his performances,
helping take his band Emerson, Lake & Palmer to global stardom; according to
Analog Days, the likes of Emerson, with his Moog performances, "did for the
keyboard what Jimi Hendrix did for the guitar".

The portable Minimoog (1970), much smaller than the modular synthesizers before
it, made synthesizers more common in live performance. The Minimoog took a place
in mainstream black music, most notably in the work of Stevie Wonder, and in
jazz, such as the work of Sun Ra. It was also used by electronic artists such as
Kraftwerk, who used it on their albums Autobahn (1974) and The Man-Machine
(1978), and later by Tangerine Dream, Klaus Schulze, and Gary Numan. In the late
1970s and the early 1980s, the Micromoog was widely used in the emerging disco
genre by artists including Abba and Giorgio Moroder. Some acts felt that using
synthesizers to create sounds was "cheating"; Queen wrote in their album liner
notes that they did not use them.

Early synthesizers could only play one note at a time, making them suitable for
basslines, leads and solos. With the rise of polyphonic synthesizers in the 70s
and 80s, "the keyboard in rock once more started to revert to the background, to
be used for fills and atmosphere rather than for soloing". Sampling, introduced
with the Fairlight synthesizer in 1979, has influenced all genres of music and
had a major influence on the development of electronic and hip hop music.

In the 1970s, electronic music composers such as Jean Michel Jarre and Isao
Tomita released successful synthesizer-led instrumental albums. This influenced
the emergence of synthpop, a subgenre of new wave, from the late 1970s to the
early 1980s. The work of German krautrock bands such as Kraftwerk and Tangerine
Dream, British acts such as John Foxx, Gary Numan and David Bowie,
African-American acts such as George Clinton and Zapp, and Japanese electronic
acts such as Yellow Magic Orchestra and Kitaro were influential in the
development of the genre. Gary Numan's 1979 hits "Are 'Friends' Electric?" and
"Cars" made heavy use of synthesizers. OMD's "Enola Gay" (1980) used distinctive
electronic percussion and a synthesized melody. Soft Cell used a synthesized
melody on their 1981 hit "Tainted Love". Nick Rhodes, keyboardist of Duran
Duran, used various synthesizers including the Roland Jupiter-4 and Jupiter-8.
Chart hits include Depeche Mode's "Just Can't Get Enough" (1981), the Human
League's "Don't You Want Me" and works by Ultravox.

In the 1980s, digital synthesizers were widely used in pop music. The Yamaha
DX7, released in 1983, became a pop staple, used on songs by A-ha, Kenny
Loggins, Kool & the Gang. Its "E PIANO 1" preset became particularly famous,
especially for power ballads, and was used by artists including Whitney Houston,
Chicago, Prince, Phil Collins, Luther Vandross, Billy Ocean, and Celine Dion.
The Roland TB-303 (1981), in conjunction with the Roland TR-808 and TR-909 drum
machines, became a foundation of electronic dance music genres such as house and
techno when producers acquired cheap second-hand units later in the decade. Korg
M1 presets were widely used in 1990s house music, beginning with Madonna's 1990
single "Vogue".

Today, the synthesizer is used in nearly every genre of music. It is considered
by the authors of Analog Days "the only innovation that can stand alongside the
electric guitar as a great new instrument of the age of electricity ... Both led
to new forms of music, and both had massive popular appeal." The authors draw a
connection to the synthesizer's origins in 1960s psychedelia to the raves and
British "second summer of love" of the 1980s and the club scenes of the 1990s
and 2000s. According to Fact in 2016, "The synthesizer is as important, and as
ubiquitous, in modern music today as the human voice." It is one of the most
important instruments in the music industry.[

## Film and television

Synthesizers are common in film and television soundtracks. ARP synthesizers,
for example, were used to create sound effects for the 1977 science fiction
films Close Encounters of the Third Kind and Star Wars, including the "voice" of
the robot R2-D2. In the 70s and 80s, synthesizers were used in the scores for
thrillers and horror films including A Clockwork Orange (1971), Apocalypse Now
(1979), The Fog (1980) and Manhunter (1986). They were also used to create
themes for television shows including Knight Rider (1982), Twin Peaks (1990) and
Stranger Things (2016).

## Jobs

The rise of the synthesizer led to major changes in music industry jobs,
comparable to the earlier arrival of sound in film, which put live musicians
accompanying silent films out of work. With its ability to imitate instruments
such as strings and horns, the synthesizer threatened the jobs of session
musicians. For a period, the Moog was banned from use in commercial work, a
restriction negotiated by the American Federation of Musicians (AFM). Robert
Moog felt that the AFM had not realized that his instrument had to be studied
like any other, and instead imagined that "all the sounds that musicians could
make somehow existed in the Moog â€” all you had to do was push a button that said
'Jascha Heifetz' and out would come the most fantastic violin player".

Musician Walter Sear persuaded the AFM that the synthesizer demanded skill, and
the category of "synthesizer player" was accepted into the union; however,
players were still subject to "suspicion and hostility" for several years. In
1982, following a tour by Barry Manilow using synthesizers instead of an
orchestra, the British Musicians' Union attempted to ban synthesizers,
attracting controversy. That decade, a few musicians skilled at programming the
popular Yamaha DX7 found employment creating sounds for other acts.
